#summary Information on the releases of matlabcontrol

= Version History =

New versions of matlabcontrol are released periodically. The capabilities and reliability of matlabcontrol have improved as underlying [JMI Java MATLAB Interface] has become better understood.

== Versioning Format ==

Versions use a `α.β.γ` format to indicate information about the release. `α` indicates a major new release which is incompatible with releases with a different `α`. `β` introduces new or improved features while retaining full binary compatibility. For example an application making use of 1.3.2 could upgrade to 1.4.0 without changing their code. `γ` is a bug fix and retains full binary compatibility. For instance an application could upgrade from 1.4.0 to 1.4.1 without changing their code.

== Releases == 

===4.0.0===

A major overhaul of matlabcontrol, it includes the following:
  * Dramatically improved reliability, with a complete rewrite of the MATLAB interaction logic
  * Transparent unification of control from inside MATLAB and outside MATLAB
  * Unconditionally thread-safe
  * Highly configurable MATLAB settings, including running hidden
  * Ability to reconnect to a previously controlled session
  * Can disconnect from a MATLAB session without exiting MATLAB
  * Detailed documentation which includes how types are converted between MATLAB and Java
  * Numeric array conversion between MATLAB and Java arrays
  * Non-interference with any other Remote Method Invocation uses in the application (when running outside MATLAB)
  * Transfer non-JRE classes between MATLAB and the Java application (when running outside MATLAB)
  * Fixes bugs preventing a Java application from terminating properly (when running outside MATLAB)

For those coming from v3, here are some important changes to note:
  * There is no longer a distinction between local and remote control class-wise. There are times when the phrases _running inside MATLAB_ and _running outside MATLAB_ are used. _Running inside MATLAB_ refers to what was previously called local control, while _running outside MATLAB_ refers to what was previous called remote control. In all cases,  [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxy.html MatlabProxy] is the class which communicates with MATLAB, although in this version there are a number of classes which can wrap around a proxy.
  * Many of [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxy.html MatlabProxy]'s core methods have changed their signatures. `getVariable(...)`, `setVariable(...)`, `eval(...)`, and `exit()` remain the same. `feval(...)` and `returningFeval(...)` now take in their function arguments using varargs which makes it easy to call a MATLAB function with any number of arguments. `returningEval(...)` and `returningFeval(...)` now return `Object[]` with the length of the array equal to the number of arguments to be returned. The overloaded version of `returningFeval(...)` that did not require specifying the number of return arguments has been removed. Additionally, `setEchoEval(...)` has been removed.
  * A [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxyFactory.html MatlabProxyFactory] can still have the location of MATLAB and the proxy creation timeout specified but it is instead done using an instance of [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxyFactoryOptions.html MatlabProxyFactoryOptions]. The default timeout for creating a proxy is now 180 seconds which is increased from the previous 60 second timeout.
  * `MatlabConnectionListener` no longer exists. When requesting a proxy via the factory's [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxyFactory.html#requestProxy(matlabcontrol.MatlabProxyFactory.RequestCallback) requestProxy(...)] method you provide a callback. Each proxy instance can have [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxy.DisconnectionListener.html DisconnectionListener]s added.
  * Requesting a proxy via [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxyFactory.html#requestProxy(matlabcontrol.MatlabProxyFactory.RequestCallback) requestProxy(...)] now returns a [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxyFactory.Request.html Request] object instead of the proxy's identifier. The identifier can be retrieved from the request. A proxy's identifier is no longer a `String`, it is now an [http://matlabcontrol.googlecode.com/svn/javadocs/doc/matlabcontrol/MatlabProxy.Identifier.html Identifier].
  * There is nothing like the deprecated `RemoteMatlabProxyController`.



===3.1.0===
Improves reliability and documentation. Fixes issue with incorrectly determining matlabcontrol's location when loaded by custom class loaders.

===3.0.1===
Fixes issues with Windows paths being determined incorrectly.

===3.0.0===
Introduces ability to control MATLAB from inside MATLAB. Package renamed from `matlab` to `matlabcontrol`. Adds Windows compatibility.

===2.0.0===
First public release. Added improved documentation. Interaction with MATLAB now essentially a refactored version of Kamin Whitehouse's MatlabControl.

===1.0.0===
The initial proof of concept. This version was never publicly released. It was essentially a thin Remote Method Invocation (RMI) wrapper around [http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~whitehouse/matlab/JavaMatlab.html Kamin Whitehouse's MatlabControl class].